so you go for a walk and see smoke
rising from the ground a volcano or
maybe the sun's falling towards the
earth making everything burn what a
disco inferno hold on stop dancing hey
the whole worries that's just an
underground fire there's a surprising
amount of them around the world and some
have been around for a really long time
you smell something burning
this American city looks like it's from
a horror movie there were once thousands
of residents in Centralia Pennsylvania
today it's a ghost town with a few
scattered buildings and roads leading
nowhere what happened here well an
underground fire forced people to leave
their homes for good the town of
Centralia appeared in Pennsylvania in
the mid 19th century people discovered
there was coal in the region so they
opened two mines and built a settlement
around them Centralia did well for many
years but the fire of 1962 changed the
town's history no one knows for sure how
it happened but there are several
theories some people believe that it
happened when the city administration
hired some firefighters to clean up the
town landfill located on the ruins of
one of the mines they set the garbage on
fire and let it burn for some time but
the fire spread so deep that they
couldn't put it out others claim that a
garbage collector dunt hot coal into an
open trash pit others think the fire had
already been blazing at that point for
thirty years they believe an earlier
fire was never extinguished and that
people noticed it only when it reached
centrally as landfill whatever the cause
the fire quickly spread through the
network of tunnels under the city the
local highway collapsed and smoke
started coming out of the cracks the
underground fire caused large areas on
the ground to subside and huge sinkholes
open right beneath some residents homes
the locals realize that they were living
with a fire literally under their feet
the smoke rising from the ground had an
impact on their health the dangerous
levels of carbon monoxide
them headaches starting in the early
1970s people began to leave Centralia
but the coal seam fire is still burning
to this day
it covers six square miles and spreads
75 feet per year and it may keep burning
for another 250 years but there's
another underground fire this time in
Australia this lasted for about six
thousand years a hundred forty miles
north of Sydney there's a place called
Mount Wiggin also known as burning
Mountain this is the oldest known coal
fire which burns at a depth of around
100 feet and moves three feet along the
ground a year the name wingin is from
the Aborigines language and it means
fire I would hope so they used to climb
up the mountainside to get warm in the
winter
and used its heat for cooking and making
tools the first person to notice the
smoke was a farmhand in 1828 he claimed
the mountain was an active volcano but
he was wrong Australia is lucky enough
to have no active volcanoes at all
geologists began to study the Mount Wing
in area they eventually confirmed that
the smoke and heat were caused by a
burning coal scene the Mount Wing and
fire lets out sulfurous gases there was
even some commercial extraction of these
gases in the 1960s people laid pipes up
to the burning vents to collect and
condense them and use the gases for
medical products today the burning
Mountain has become a tourist attraction
there's a park near the mountain and
tourists can take a guided tour to the
top of the coal seat there's a vantage
point where you can look down on the
ground transformed by the underground
fire some people think the Mount wingin
blaze was caused by a lightning strike
or forest fire a
they're possible cause may have been
self ignition and coal doesn't need much
to do this some types of it can
spontaneously combust at temperatures as
low as 100 degrees Fahrenheit as soon as
an underground fire occurs the
temperature rises quickly oxygen reaches
the call through small gaps in the soil
and fans the flames the poor ventilation
retains the heat in some coal fires
temperatures reach over a thousand
degrees Fahrenheit but interestingly the
surface temperature may raise by only
one or two degrees there are plenty more
weird underground fires out there one of
them can be found just outside of st.
Louis Missouri there's a landfill there
full of nuclear waste just 1,000 feet
from the smoldering fire toxic waste and
fire are definitely two things that
should never meet if the fire ever
reached this waste it wouldn't create an
explosion but it would still release
large amounts of toxic fumes over the
nearby area luckily local officials have
an idea for how to fix it the plan is to
remove about 67% of the radioactive
stuff from the landfill it'll take five
years and cost more than 200 million
dollars so why don't they just
extinguish the fire well coal fires are
very difficult to put out it can be an
exhausting Lee long expensive and
completely unpredictable process some
experts believe that digging a fire out
of the ground is a good solution but
others say that exposing the fire to the
ear might make it flare up even more and
even after the firefighters huge efforts
to localize it another layer of material
lying hundreds of feet further down
might catch fire again just a few days
later so in some cases the only right
thing to do is to let them burn coal
seam fires are surprisingly common there
are thousands of them burning at this
exact moment many of them don't really
produce flames
instead they kind of smoldered
underground fires often occur in coal
rich countries such as China which burns
up to 200
million tons of coal each year in India
about 70 fires burned beneath the Jharia
coal field an area nearly the size of
Washington DC there's another famous
coal seam fire in Germany it's younger
than the one in Australia but it's still
one of the oldest underground fires in
the world
it was ignited around 16 68 and is still
burning today the Brendan er Berg or
burning Mountain and German is also a
popular place to visit even johann
wolfgang von goethe went to the small
town of doug willard to see the
smoldering Mountain coal fires leave
their mark on the landscape and the
environment they can ignite grass and
herd animals but for some coal fires can
be a good thing for instance the higher
ground temperatures near the coal fire
in Germany have helped many insects and
spiders to survive the cold winter but
burning coal isn't the only thing that
can cause an everlasting fire there are
also natural gas fires one of the most
impressive examples is near baku the
city of azerbaijan now I get why they
call this place the land of fire this
one is called UNR dag which means you
guessed it burning mountain ok not a
very original name there but the view is
fantastic the NR dag is a mountain in
the middle of a real fire this one isn't
just smoldering there's literally a wall
of flames which leap 10 feet into the
air and can't be extinguished by either
rain or snow there are a few natural gas
fires left in the world but most of them
are in Azerbaijan nobody can work out
the age of the NR dag fire some believe
it has burned for 20,000 years others
claim it's been there for only a few
decades the cause of this frightening
but fascinating fiery landscape is the
natural gas that leaks from beneath the
earth's surface
this gas burns when it comes into
contact with oxygen this process won't
end until the gas runs out or stops
leaking from underground there used to
be another natural fire on the opposite
side of NR dag but over time that
fire went out it's believed that this
hill may have inspired the coat of arms
of Baku which features three torches and
the seed since 2007 the territory of Yin
are dag has become the state historical
cultural and natural reserve with an
area of 160 acres tourists can walk on
the mountain alone or take a guided tour
to see the other natural wonders of the
app Charan Peninsula such as a sulphur
spring or an active mud volcano another
fiery or not so fiery place in
Azerbaijan is the fire temple of Baku
the original name in Azerbaijani
translates as the house of fire the 18th
century temple was built around another
natural underground fire although this
one isn't there anymore
it actually went out in 1969 after most
of the gas was extracted from here
whew I can feel the burn what a workout